it was the very beginning of the year
1912.
a giant chunk of ice broke off a glacier
in southwest greenland
the ice was made up of the snow that had
fallen about 100
000 years before the event that was the
time when mammoths were still roaming
the planet
the iceberg started its journey it was a
huge thing
more than 1700 feet long it weighed
around 75 million tons
it was also a very peaceful chunk of ice
it steered clear of ships and busy
transport routes
not that there were many in the place
where the iceberg was born
and then it somehow floated much further
to the south and other bergs did
our iceberg was lucky others melt long
before they get to these latitudes
out of fifteen thousand to thirty
thousand icebergs
that drift away from greenland's
glaciers only one percent
ever makes it all the way to the
atlantic that's why
it's so amazing that in april our
iceberg the traveler
was already more than five thousand
miles away from the arctic circle
even after melting into the water for
months this block of ice still weighed
an impressive one and a half million
tons it's almost twice as much as the
golden gate bridge
the iceberg's top part was towering over
the surface of the ocean for more than
100 feet
and still if you noticed it floating
next to your ocean liner
it would have looked harmless but only
at first glance
like only a tiny part of a jumbo piece
of ice
the largest part of any iceberg is
always hidden under the surface
a mere one-tenth is normally visible
above the water
and the berg we're talking about wasn't
an exception
several days before our iceberg made it
to the atlantic ocean
a magnificent ship left port it was
a luxurious steam ship carrying more
than 3 000 passengers and crew members
at that time it was the largest ship
ever built
the liner was called the titanic it was
considered unsinkable
at the very beginning of his journey it
nearly collided with the steamship new
york
luckily the titanic managed to pass by
the other vessel with a couple of feet
to spare
the people crowding the liners decks let
out a collective sigh
of relief little did they know what was
awaiting them in the nearest future
meanwhile the iceberg was approaching
the area that titanic was going to cross
on its way to new york it happened on
april 14th
when the ship was in the north atlantic
ocean 370 miles away from newfoundland
at about 11 40 p.m people who were still
awake on board the titanic
toppled down pushed over by some
mysterious and powerful force
those who had already gone to bed got
catapulted to the floor
both the passengers and crew members
were screaming
panicky and confused just minutes before
the commotion started
an iceberg had appeared right in front
of the ship
it was our wandering iceberg why hadn't
the crew noticed it earlier
there might have been several reasons
i'll tell you about them a bit later
anyway once the liner collided with a
huge chunk of ice
it was doomed unable to divert its
course
the ship ruptured at least five of its
hull compartments
they started to fill with water with
alarming speed
the titanic's compartments weren't
capped at the top
that's why the water spilled over and
started to flood each succeeding one
the front of the ship began to sink
causing the back part to lift vertically
into the air
and then with the deafening roar the
liner broke in half
the rest is history but few people know
what happened to the iceberg after the
ship had hit it
it gets us back to the question of why
no one had spotted the floating ice
mountain
until it was too late let's track the
events of that fateful day
at around 6 pm captain smith finally
decides to change the titanic's course
he's been receiving iceberg warnings
throughout the entire day
the ship starts to head further to the
south but the speed remains the same
at 9 40 pm another ship informs titanic
about a vast ice field packed with
icebergs
unfortunately this message never reaches
the liners bridge
at about 11 p.m yet another steamship
radio's titanic
they say the ice has surrounded them
making their ship stop
this message also gets ignored meanwhile
most of the passengers on the luxury
liner
have already retired to their rooms at
35 the sailors in titanic's crow's nest
notice the iceberg they ring the bell
three times
which means something's ahead then they
call the bridge
the engines get reversed and the doors
to the supposedly watertight
compartments
close just five minutes later
the huge liner starboard side collides
with the iceberg
the mailroom begins to fill with water
soon other reports come
they don't sound encouraging at least
five other compartments are flooded
it becomes clear titanic has just a few
hours before it sinks
the night was exceptionally calm with no
moonlight
no wind and no waves and since the waves
weren't breaking against the iceberg
it was difficult to perceive the giant
but there's also a theory
that what sank titanic was a black bird
if you had to draw an iceberg i bet it
would be a white
towering chunk of ice covered with snow
but those who have visited antarctica
know
that icebergs come in millions of hues
they can be multicolored
patterned or striped like candies
icebergs can also be black
there are two ways such an unusually
colored shard of ice can form
first the ice might be extremely pure
with no air bubbles or cracks whatsoever
in this case there's nothing to scatter
the light
the iceberg will absorb it all and look
black
or an erupting volcano can cover a
glacier with volcanic ash
then the ice that breaks off this
glacier will be dark colored too
experts don't know the true reason why
titanic's iceberg
looked so dark or whether it was really
the case
but one of the sailors who was in the
crow's nest testified the ice was black
the other said it was either gray or
dark gray
there's nothing exciting or mysterious
about the so-called black birds
they're icebergs that roll over after
their top part is melted
which changes the weight distribution if
their lower part is smooth enough to
absorb light
they look dark plus they usually aren't
exposed to the air long enough
for the white frost to build up but
let's say
this theory is wrong and the iceberg
wasn't actually black
and still the only reason why you see
things is because light gets reflected
from them
the less light there is the less likely
you are to notice something
the ocean surface will always reflect
the moon and starlight
but an irregularly shaped almost
vertical iceberg
will have fewer chances of doing so
that's why
it'll look almost black against the
glimmering water surface
at night icebergs can be rather
difficult to detect without a radar
in any case our iceberg wasn't noticed
in time
titanic crashed into it and sang end of
story
apparently not on april 15th
the german ocean liner ss prinz aliber
was sailing through the north atlantic
he was traveling a few miles away from
the place where titanic had sunk
several hours before the german ship's
chief steward who hadn't learned about
the disaster yet
saw an iceberg what drew his attention
was a fairly large streak of red paint
going along the iceberg's base
surprised the man took a photo of his
discovery
he thought the paint meant a ship hit
the iceberg during the past 12 hours
the next person who saw the infamous
chunk of ice and took its photo
was the captain of the vessel used to
lay deep sea telecommunications cables
the ship was sent to help in the area
where titanic had sunk
the captain later claimed the iceberg he
had seen had been the only one in that
area
plus the red paint it wasn't difficult
to connect the dots
in 2015 one of these photos was sold at
auction for more than
32 thousand dollars and still
experts are unsure whether the image
really shows the infamous block of ice
it might be another innocent iceberg
that was floating nearby
at that time